(calm music)
For any of you who were intrigued
with the EPAC time frame involving 2012,
I believe you may find this conversation with Gregg Braden
one of the most satisfying yet.
As a man of science,
Gregg has dug deeply into the lore and science
supporting the notion
that a great cycle of change is playing out.
This is augmented by a math technology
that shows relationships between seed events
and repeated events.
In this mix is human choice,
it's our choice according to Gregg
as to the outcome of the 2012 phenomena.
I love what you were talking about last night
and I've been aware of your work for 20 years
from before you even had official publishing
and watched
how you've grown.
Oh, you were the one?
Yeah, that was me, I bought that one.
And actually, you were the one that initially
helped me understand that there were cycles of life
and changes in geomagnetic changes
and that's how it became introduced to you.
You've expanded hugely from there.
And last night, you had everyone magnetized to your message
and that's really a keyword we'll get back to
because you were saying it's not about
this waiting for the other shoe to drop at 2012.
2012 is a beginning
but you backed off and said there's evidence
that 2010 and '11 could be a little different story.
Absolutely.
Let's just jump into the story from there.
Well, the story for me almost universally,
our indigenous ancestors
view our world in terms of cycles.
And the cycles unfold as cycles within cycles
or what we call fractal cycles of time.
So they look at the obvious cycles of a 24-hour a day,
or the cycles of 28th day lunar cycle,
the seasons, those are very obvious to us.
But within those cycles, they have viewed them,
our indigenous ancestors in the ancients,
those who have come before us,
they view those cycles as unfolding
within even larger cycles,
some of them thousands,
some of them tens of thousands of years in length.
Cycles that we in the modern world tend to discount
and that modern science is only
within the last years of the 20th century
begun to understand the role of,
the role that these cycles play
in our lives and in our world.
And the bottom line is that earth undergoes
rapid profound changes on a cyclic basis.
The cycles determined by our
location in the heavens, our orbit, our tilt
in the orbit around our milky way galaxy,
the core, the center of our milky way galaxy.
And one of the great mysteries to me
is how our indigenous ancestors,
first, how could they have even known
that these cycles exist?
I mean, who was around
to track a cycle for 5,000 years or 10,000 years?
That's one of the first great mysteries.
But secondly,
the fact that these cycles exist
and that our own science now is confirming them,
I believe lends a continuity to our existence
as a civilization now
and to our existence as species on this planet.
Because the kinds of changes
that our world is going through right now,
the extremes of climate, the extremes of weather,
what's happening with our sea levels,
what's happening with ocean temperatures,
with air temperatures,
our ability to grow food the way pollution shift
and the way those shifts are driven
by changes in our world
is anomalous as those changes appearto us right now.
In the near term,
when we step back and look at the big picture,
what we find is we are not the first
people in this planet
that have gone through these kinds of changes.
Now for a lot of people
who have not dedicated their adult lives
to studying these kinds of phenomenon,
the buzz word out there is about this 2012 end date
of a cycle that was indicated and calculated
on the Mayan system of time keeping, the Mayan calendar.
While 2012 is really the catch word
that everyone is looking at as a moment in time,
these cycles are really about a zone,
a window of change.
And, so to answer your question
for me as a scientist,
when I saw the convergence of extremes
that appear to be happening within our time right now,
late 80's, 90's and now we're in the early 2000's.
Well, I couldn't argue that they were happening.
My question was why?
Why would so many different things,
the extremes in what we've always thought
was the norm of our world,
why would they all be happening
in such a compressed period of time?
And I quickly understood the only way
that I could answer that question
was to understand the cycles.
So when we stepped back and looked at the big picture,
what we'd began to see
is that the unusual things happening in our planet now,
do happen on a rhythmic cyclic basis.
And if we know how to look into the cycles of the past,
we can give ourselves a reasonable,
a reasonable idea of what we can expect
rather than speculation,
the guesswork, there's so much fear
that's being perpetuated.
Some of the ideas are well intentions,
some of them are very manipulative,
some of them are religious based,
some of them are simply survivalist and fear based,
some of them are misinterpretations of ancient prophecies
from Nostradamus and Jeane Dixon and Edgar Cayce,
the Hopi traditions.
all of these are in the Mix right now
channeling from off planet entities,
everything is in the Mix.
And they all benefit us.
They all tell us something us something.
But as a scientist, I'm looking for facts
and the only way to understand those facts
is to look and know how to look into the past,
to the time when these cycles have happened before
with the new information we have now
so that we can see if we're truly living on anomalous time.
And what find, the bottom line is that
when we look into this point
where we are right now, the end of a 5,125 year cycle
that's driven by the precession of the equinoxes
that some of your other interviews have described in details
so we wont do that here.
But when we look into precisely
such a time in cycle's past,
what we find is the changes in our world
or exactly what happens
every time we go through the changes
and our indigenous ancestors did their very, very best
in the language of their day
to convey to us the profound significance
of what they experienced
because they knew it would happen again,
what changed in their world,
but perhaps more importantly, what did they do
to change something within themselves
to help them deal emotionally, socially, culturally
with the changes in the world around them.
And what's interesting
is last night in your presentation,
you were able to show some of the
visual representations of both ancient Tibetan glimpse,
it is laid over Mayan
and it's virtually identical in helping us understand
that we're going to be moving into another phase
and as you say, the central theme was us.
It is us.
And this is what I think is so important,
it's not just the Mayans, or it's not just Hopi,
there's this universal theme.
If we know how to look and where to look
the place out through
the civilizations, the cultures,
the ancestors of our past,
they're all essentially saying the same thing.
What they're saying 3,000 B.C.
about 5,000 years ago at the end of the last cycle
immediately when it was over.
And this is a good news,
it was over and everyone lived through it,
most people lived through it,
to write to the people of their future saying,
"We just experienced this thing
"and this is what happened.
"This is what have meant to us."
I'm so in awe of the language.
If we were to write to our future civilization today,
what words would we use?
What language?
Would we even be speaking English 5,000 years from now
when the next group of humans goes through
where we are right now,
I don't know the answer to that.
It has to be symbolic
or geometric or both, yeah.
Precisely, so when I look at the eloquence
and the simplicity of the visual maps of the cycles,
of the pictograms,
for example, the Hopi, the prophecy rock
and how eloquent theses messages are
and how well they've been preserved
and how meaningful they are to us,
I am in awe.
I believe in our ancestors that conveyed this message
but what they told us,
was it said, "Your world is gonna change.
"And we can tell that the world will change,
"what we cannot tell you is how
"the outcome will look to you
"because it's being determined by you, people of our future.
"You are choosing by the way you live your lives
"in response to the changes you are determining
"how well you survive and transcend
"what those changes mean to you."
And here's why this is important
and this is bottom line for me of everything we're doing.
When we know where to look into the cycles of the past,
we'll talk about this a little bit,
through the geologic history of the earth,
the ice cores, the sea floors, sediment cores
that tells us the physical changes
that happened to the planet.
When we know where to look in the archaeological record,
it tells us how civilizations
responded to those changes.
And what we begin to see
and this is so profound,
is that some of the greatest civilizations
in the history of this planet that we're aware of,
they collapsed and some of them disappeared
when they reached the point in their cycle
where we are in our cycle right now
because they made a fatal mistake
then, that I believe we can learn from and avoid now.
And the mistake was this,
in the presence of the changes
that seemed anomalous to them
much as to changes seemed anomalous to us today,
and then their fear of what those changes met
and not knowing how to respond,
they reacted by competing with one another.
They said, "There's not enough,
"everything's changing,
"there's not enough resource to go around.
"We're gonna grab the last vestiges of what we can claim
"for ourselves and everybody else is on their own."
Fear in competition, classic.
Fear in competition.
And those were the civilizations that collapsed.
Everybody lost, nobody won and they disappeared.
We've got archeological evidence on the border right now
between India and Pakistan, what is now Pakistan,
on the Rajasthan plains, advanced civilization,
highly advance civilization.
Hot and cold running, water closed, sewage systems,
their cities were laid down in perfect grids,
they have advance language, mathematics,
architecture ,science,
they had glass windows, they disappeared.
The same thing happened just outside of Lima, Northern Peru
on the 5,000 year mark.
And I think there is something that we can learn from this.
Because it wasn't necessarily evidence
in that particular region of some kind
of geophysical change that
would have created it.
No asteroid impact
or no sort of flare.
Well at least we don't see the evidence for that.
But what the archaeologists say and this is what's telling
and specifically in the sites that we find in Turkey,
the burnt city of Turkey
is one of the oldest sites being recognized now,
the site on the Rajasthan plains is that
in the archaeological remains or remnants of the city,
there are remains of humans.
But they're all piled up at one end of the city,
they were running from something
that was happening on the other end
and it's very touching.
The husbands are clutching their wives,
and the women, the mothers are holding their children
and pets are all huddled together.
And the archaeologist term is
that they are in impostors of flight,
they're fleeing from something
and they left us a record in their language
that has yet to be translated.
This is one of the rare languages
to this day have never translated,
it's called Indus Valley script.
However, in that part of the world there is a record
that is believed to be a fairytale
of a great battle that happened a long time ago.
It's in the 100,000 verses
and what is now called the Mahabharata,
the Hindu epic of the Mahabharata,
that happens to have occurred precisely on
the Rajasthan plains, in the place
where this archaeological site is now being found.
And it's all about a great battle that happened
between two elements of a highly advance civilization
where a weapon was used,
that had never been used before.
And we don't know exactly what happened there.
But something happened
and it happened to humans.
And the point is that is was
fear in competition--
The competition and the fear
and that's what we see in the other sites.
So we look at the patterns,
and I'm not saying we are re-living precisely the patterns
but the general themes
where we are right now, our world is changing,
some people are better equipped to deal within others,
but we're family on this planet.
And my sense is that if we can,
if we can honor the principle of the family that we are,
I'm encouraged, I think that's what happening
and worked together as individuals,
in our communities work together as nations.
This morning I woke up,
I'm gonna date our film here a little bit
but I woke up, turn on the news
and I saw something very touching.
I don't know if you saw this today or not,
two former presidents
were standing with our current president
so it's Bill Clinton,
George W. Bush,
and president Obama.
They had all their arms around one another
and they were emotionally declaring
that they would work together with the nations of the world
to pull Haiti through this disaster.
Even when the new cycles fade
and they go on to another story, they said,
"We're gonna keep this thing current
"and we're gonna do this well,
"we're gonna do it really right."
Because it hasn't always been well and right in the past
and they deserve that.
And they laid out a plan.
And to see those three men working together
who I know ideologically haven't always agreed
but they agreed on this
and I could tell they had lot of respect for one another.
And I think
I only agree with everything they've done in the past
but I think there is something, something changed
and something really beautiful was happening.
You were saying something
that felt like authentic emotion?
I was personally.
Personally I was
and I'm encouraged by that.
So I think I, my senses
that where we are right now,
our world is changing so quickly,
faster than we can document in the textbooks,
teach it in our classrooms,
the world change so quickly.
I have to say this really carefully that
the power structures of corporations and government,
I believe, are struggling to reconcile
a way of being in doing business that's worked for 200 years
and a way that they've grown accustomed to.
They're struggling to reconcile that
to meet the demands of a word that change quicker
than they knew to how to accommodate.
They would appear to be a lot of evidence
to support that.
I'm not saying that they didn't know
the world was changing
but I think the world change even quicker
than those individuals believed would
and perhaps moved in the direction
that was a little different than what they had expected.
So in a sense the reason I say that,
in the sense where an uncharted territory as a civilization
culturally, socially and as individuals
unless we have the wisdom
to look at the past and the patterns
and then we say we're not in an uncharted territory,
it's just rare but there's a precedent.
There was something else
you talked about last night within that.
We have to again look back to these cycles
so we'll just for a moment get back into the cycles--
So that was a long answer to your short question--
No.
Give me lots of long answers there's just,
I thought I'd just go ahead
and put this wee bit back in.
Talking about the indigenous peoples
understanding these great cycles, this understanding,
this wisdom was passed on obviously
through the travel structure,
the structure of the peoples of today
and when you had a situation that was so beautiful
and touching when you showed this last night,
it's the woman that had emerged from the tent,
where were you?
You were up and she was beautiful.
A lone woman attending her,
I don't know if it was goats or yaks.
Yak.
Yaks.
Her yak.
It was1998.
Beyond remote area.
And she emerged and told you something that
I thought was just amazing.
I was with a group in the highlands
of the Western Tibetan plateau,
we were six days out of the capital of Lhasa,
moving up in elevation toward the Nepalese border
which is on the other side of the mountain range.
And we had stopped in the pass, there's a mountain pass
and I believe it's around 16,000 feet,
above 15,500, 16,000 feet above sea level,
where they don't see a lot of company,
they don't have a lot of guest there.
And we stopped in a big Chinese bus
and pulled off the side of the road
and this woman walked out of the yak haired tent,
she's all by herself and--
There was nothing else around her?
Well, her yak were there but you couldn't see it.
And they were really good looking yak,
I want you to know.
Ultra yak?
Beautiful yak, yes.
But she came up to us and then there was a clarity
and you saw it in her face in the photographs,
clear white eyes, that means she just stared right at us
and after she asked why we were there,
she asked a question to the translator.
She said, "Do you know how special this time
"in the history of our planet is?"
And I wanted to hear her story
so I said, "No, tell me."
"Tell me what you know."
And she began a story.
And she said for generations her ancestors had told them
that the change was coming
and how would they know
that the change was there
'cause they're not satellites and GPS and,
looking at the kinds of phenomena we're looking at.
They're looking at things that are familiar to them.
And she said, "When our ancestors told us
"that when we stand on the rock,"
and she pointed down to the bottom of this cliff,
"When we stand on the rock
"and we can no longer reach up and touch the ice,
"the bottom of the glacier
"that was coming down that mountain,
"well, we can't do that anymore,
"that means the time to change has come,
"we need to move our herds
"and we need to prepare ourselves
"and live differently than we have all of these years."
On 1998, global warming
had caused that glacier to recede about 30, 35 feet
from where it was and I couldn't touch it anymore.
And that was one of the reasons she was
one of the last people there.
It's seasonal but most the other people had left
and they were going for lower elevations
and they were preparing for change.
Which is interesting,
you go head, sorry.
Well, the point was
that their culture allows for it as so many do,
it's like the great secret everybody knows but us.
And we are just now catching on,
we, being not your listeners and not you and I
but we as the Western world in modern science.
And now that we're catching on,
we're catching on and trying to describe it
from a scientific perspective
but there are personal and social implications
that I think science isn't really addressing right now.
And you had at the same time
the media would take it and run with it
and say, yes we're in this dizzey period of time,
we've created it because of our carbon emissions
and so forth.
I mean it gets very complex because that's not to say
that we have not caused a tremendous amount of damage
and pollution on this planet.
At the same time, it is also not to say
that we are totally responsible
for these anomalous changes happening
all around us now.
From what I'm seeing of the cycles,
and I have to be really careful, it's such a delicate issue
and it has been hijacked and made into a political issue.
The bottom line is that people's lives and way of life
is at risk right now.
People are loosing their lives because of the changes.
We have done a tremendous amount of damage
to this planet environmentally.
That's a fact.
So in terms of what we've done to the oceans,
the cutting of trees, our forests,
toxic elements that in my opinion
is what Copenhagen should have been about.
When it comes to the rising
in the ebb and flow of temperatures on the planet,
there's a strong case.
It could be made from, and we can talk more about this,
from the ice cores of Antarctica,
we can see there's a cyclic warming and cooling
in the ebb and flow of temperatures on the planet
that are driven by
another cycle we haven't even spoken about yet,
solar cycles and it's a very strong body of evidence
that suggest that.
So it appears in the past
there've been very high levels of carbon dioxide
higher than they are now
and the temperatures didn't increase.
So it maybe, and this is where the scientific community
is struggling a little bit, that maybe
that the C02 is important
but it may not be what's causing
the temperatures to increase.
We're looking now
at cyclic evidence of the effect of the sun
upon our planet,
the solar influence called solar radiance upon the planet.
We can go back through 60-80,000 years
through the ice cores in Antarctica
and find correlations in the layers of the ice that tells
how strong and how weak the influence from the sun is.
And it matches almost precisely these 5,000 year cycles.
I mean, it's uncanny.
And when the air and the temperatures warm,
the sea levels rise because the ice melts
and you can see that in the ice cores.
And what's interesting
is the warming generally is short lived
and followed by a longer or more pronounced cooling cycle
that causes more problems than the warming does.
And there are number of scientists now that are saying,
we very probably are moving into this cooling cycle
but there's a time where both are happening
at the same time.
In this really,
you are saying is dependent upon
a weakening of the magnetic field of the earth.
The magnetic fields of the earth ebb and flow,
stronger and weaker
when the magnetic fields are stronger,
you can think of them like a blanket.
It protects those beautiful planet we live on
from incoming influence of
ionized plasma and gas,
the solar wind coming from the sun.
So when the magnetic fields are high, we're protected.
When the fields are low, there's less protection.
While 2,000 years ago,
and our scientists know this,
2,000 years ago we reached the magnetic peak
and we began to decline
and we've been declining ever since.
Well, that's when I first came in contact
with your work when you're talking about--
1988, I was a geologist.
I was seeing this happening.
As a geologist, I was looking at this and I said,
"What does this means to us?"
Everybody said, "Don't worry about it."
So, that was '88.
Yeah.
So, what we know now is that
the magnetic fields did begin
a dramatic decline 2,000 years ago,
it hasn't turned back since.
And then last 150 years,
that decline has increased,
we lost about 10% of the earth's magnetic field,
another 10% the last 150 years.
So, the field is weaker now
than it was 2,000 years ago
allowing more of a solar influence
to affect the oceans in the atmosphere.
But the flip side, this is so interesting to me,
is although it looks to us like the magnetic fields
are really falling fast
and they have in some respects,
if we look at the nearer term,
when step back and look at the big picture,
what we find is that the drop in the magnetic fields
that has occurred in the last 150 years,
now has brought us into the range
where we always are
when we reach the point in the cycle
where we are now, this 5,000 years cycle.
And it's not so anomalous,
it's just we don't see it happen so often.
It doesn't mean that the magnetic fields
aren't necessarily going to fall to zero.
It doesn't mean that we're gonna go through
a polar reversal.
We have in the past but the evidence says
it's not part of our 2012 scenario.
So it's one last thing we have to worry about.
But to me, it's important to see
in the place and the context,
the changes right now that we're seeing
and where they fit within this 5,000 year cycle
that our ancestors told us about,
so, this is what the new book Fractal Time is all about.
If we know where and how to look into the past,
for dates,
then we can take those dates like a cookie cutter
and superimpose them on physical things
so that we can check on those dates and see what happen.
So we can go into the ice cores
and we can see 5,000 years ago, one cycle,
10,000 years ago, two cycles,
26,000 years ago, the beginning of this cycle
of the precession of the equinoxes.
So we take those dates and then we have a template.
What was the strength of the magnetic field of the earth
at those points?
Where the sea levels rising or falling at those points?
Where the temperatures rising or falling at those points?
Was the sun's energy, stronger or weaker at those points?
And what we find is at those points,
the magnetic fields are always weaker,
it means the atmosphere of the earth is heated up,
it means the oceans were heated up,
it means the ice begins to melt.
When the ice melts, the water has to go somewhere.
The sea levels begin to increase.
That changes climate
and the climate begins to change
the weather patterns in the local areas
and all of the sudden,
we're not growing corn in Nebraska in August anymore
like we have for the last thousand years.
Even the wine country in California
is moving towards Oregon, yeah.
Exactly.
I live in Northern New Mexico,
they're growing grapes in Northern New Mexico now.
So it is evidence
by what we're seeing through agriculture
but there's something else about this magnetic thing
we're talking about.
Science, you're saying, has now revealed or is now
can understand and articulate the fact that
when you start looking at the galactic center of milky way,
you have an increased magnetic field.
You have a decreased field here on earth
as all of this is happening
as we're moving into a saturation.
So explain how that all works together.
This is the question, how far beyond our planet
do we want to look for the trigger
of what's driving the effects?
So the changes are happening on earth
and we're aware of that
and in our indigenous ancestors were telling about this.
Where I think and I've shared this
with audiences all over the world
and some of them through translators
and some in English.
And I've seen their eyes and this is important,
this is meaningful for people to understand
that the changes are not confined to the earth,
it isn't just the earth
and the earth isn't changing because we did something wrong
and the earth isn't broken.
And I think it's really important for us to understand that.
The changes are happening on every planet
on our solar system is undergoing change right now.
Mars is undergoing a climate change.
It's global warming on Mars.
The poles are melting.
There have been magnetic reversals on Uranus and Neptune,
there have been reversals there.
The planets in our solar system are changing.
Our sun is changing.
And whatever it is that's driving these changes
extends beyond and from somewhere
other than our solar system.
So within the last years of the last decade,
the late 90's and early 2,000's,
Peer reviewed scientific journals,
made discoveries that too many of our listeners
may not sound like a big deal
but to the scientific world, they are a big deal.
So the first discovery was that
the center of our milky way galaxy
is a powerful source of energy
coming from something that we didn't know was there.
Now, at the center of our milky way
when I was in school,
maybe when our listeners were in school, our viewers,
we always thought there's a big black hole
at the center of the milky way and there is.
That's a powerful source of energy.
But it's also clouded by a lot of dust,
galactic dust you can't see what else is there.
A hubble space telescope now is able to look
through that dust and found the largest,
most powerful star anywhere in the milky way
is right there in the center and it's kinda parked
next to this black hole.
So the irony is you've got a black hole
and a massive star together.
And the implications of that or vast,
but together, the combined effect
creates what are called magnetic filaments
and this is important.
It's not like a solid filled, they're like tentacles
of magnetic influence
that affects our solar system and other solar systems
depending on where we are in our orbit.
So, okay, scientific discoveries that first
there's a field of energy in the center of milky way
that has powerful effects on earth,
it ebbs and flows.
The second discovery is that the ebb and flow
occurred on a rhythmic basis,
cyclic basis that our ancestors were able to calculate
through the mathematics and the rhythms of nature,
they understood.
And it's all about earths position in the heavens,
the tilt, the orbit, the wobble,
where we are in the elliptical orbit
around this center of the milky way,
when we're at the far ends, we're further away,
where on the
sides of the ellipse, we're a little closer.
And all of these things appeared to be
what's driving this change in our planet.
So when we put all of these together,
for me, I think we're missing the point
if we say we've gotta work together to stop
climate change
and we recognize that the climate changes
on a cyclic basis.
And my sense is, it's more important,
I'm less concerned about the physical changes
for the 2012 window of time.
I wanna be really clear about this.
Because 2012 is a date
that the Mayans chose
when the sun from here on earth would appear
as if it were rising in the center of the dark rift
of the milky way galaxy,
a place they associate with birth and death.
So that was a date.
But to get to that alignment,
we're talking about galaxies, and solar systems,
and planets, huge systems that move slowly
over long periods of time.
So it's not like we go to bed
on December 20th of 2012 on one world
and we wake the next morning and everything has changed.
But what is important,
and this is important for my audiences as well.
I found this to be very comforting to some people
is to know that we're living with
science now are calling a zone, a window,
a 2012 window of change
that actually began around 1980,
ends around 2016.
We're now in the year 2010 that means,
we're over half way through.
It means we've already experienced
many of the most profound frightening changes
of the prophecies and the predictions.
We're already seeing
forest fires raging out of control in multiple continents.
We're already seeing millions of people die
from disease that has no medical cure,
in multiple continents.
We're already seeing extremes and earthquakes,
tsunamis wiping entire communities off
the face of the earth.
We're already seeing the worst of
many of this prophecies, it's tough but
I think we're doing all right.
So to know rather than
every day feeling like we're ticking down the clock
getting closer and closer to this bad thing
to recognize that we're already living
many of those conditions.
And the other key for the prophecies
is that 2012 is the beginning,
it's the end of the cycle
5,125 year cycle
by virtue that it's the birth of the next cycle.
And what that means is that
2012 is when we begin the world anew.
It's not when the changes happen.
And that means that whatever changes
are required to get us to that point,
they've already happened by the time we reach 2012.
And we're ticking down now.
We've got a couple of years left on that one
and you have this system
of calculations--
It's there system that I've made very accessible.
Well, yes.
What is it?
I mean, first of all, we're trying to figure out
what do you call that?
Because this is really important.
Time code calculator.
And let's talk about why that's important
because of the years we're in right now.
Yeah,
what we know is that the changes that we're talking,
first of all,
we know the changes are cyclic,
we know that people had lived through them in the past
so I just wanna to reiterate,
I'm less concerned about the physical changes,
my senses that we will
and technologies, a lot of this.
Not only we survive but I think we'll transcend
the physical changes.
From my perspective, the great danger now
and we're not out of the woods on this one yet.
It's how we respond personally,
socially, culturally,
and there's nations to the changes on the planet
and the technology that we have
allows us to wage war.
And we can destroy
an entire country in a matter of hours or days now.
We'd never have that power before.
And there's a lot of momentum moving toward
a great war right now
that I believe that we concur
but I don't think it never has to happen.
Let's go back and talk about that
via this technology.
So all of those things,
I'm less concerned about the physical changes,
I'd like to let people know the changes we're seeing now
would always happen, our ancestors got through them,
and we seem to do well if we work together.
So here's the key.
Our ancestors knew that these changes occur
following natural rhythms and cycles
that can be calculated easily
following the simple mathematics
that govern much of our universe.
It doesn't have to be a lot of big,
complex mathematic computations.
We can do it that way
but my sense says that nature
is only as complex as we make it
and it's actually a simple system.
So knowing that,
in the book Fractal Time,
I gave our readers some simple math,
but a lot of readers that don't like math
so we automated this
on the website and made something called
a time code calculator that can be used
in three different modalities.
And one of those modalities
allows us to choose a seed date from the past.
The date that set in the motion a pattern of energy
that will repeat on a rhythmic basis
to enter to that date
and know what fractal cycles will repeat
and when they will repeat.
So for example,
the year 1941
was the first year that United States of America,
and that's history, was surprised and attacked
on American soil by a foreign power.
1941, that was a seed for surprise and attack
on American soil.
When I first developed this,
the first test I did was I plugged that date in
and ironically, one of the fractal cycles
was exactly on 9/11, September 9/11.
You didn't back engineer it?
You just stumbled on this,
I mean it just--
I didn't stumble, what I did was I put
the mask together and I said,
If this were gonna work,
I'd like to try it on something big,
what's one of the most profound
life changing moments in recent history
and at this time when I put this together,
it was September 2001.
So, I plugged in 1941 seed date, there was,
I don't have the numbers in front of me,
the first fractal was in the 1970's
that corresponded with the Yom Kippur War
which could have resulted,
it was a proxy war between United States
and the Former Soviet Union.
We transcended that and the date after that
ended up being 9/11.
it was right on that cycle.
So this is an example.
Now, when we see a date like that,
it doesn't mean that the event must repeat.
It means the conditions are right
for that kind of thing to happen again
and it's an indication, it's a tool
that allows us to use a little more sensitivity
and a little more diplomacy
if we know that we're moving into one of those cycles.
So the collective consciousness
must have been right to allow a 9/11 to have occured
more or less.
The conditions,
the global conditions
where there's a whole conversation.
We can have about why and what but,
and I'm not saying that we necessarily
could have prevented it
but I think knowing that we are living
a cycle where the conditions are right
for some of the most frightening possibilities of our past.
So for example,
if our diplomats are in negotiations between
the Israelis and the Iranians right now
or the Palestinians and the Israelis in the Middle East
and very delicate negotiations.
And we happen to know that those negotiations
are during a countdown to sanctions or war
and we'd see that it's happening right on a time
when a cycle makes the conditions right for that war.
What it says to me
is that's the time to be really, really sensitive,
these very sensitive diplomacy, very clear communication
maybe go a little further
and go that extra mile now
where we wouldn't have through years ago
or two years from now
because the likelihood of this turning out bad
is greater in the time of
when these cycles converged.
So that's an example.
So knowing that, we took the time code calculator
and looked at some of the
defining events at the 20th century.
And we can use any of them.
I mean, you can use good things.
You can use the end of the war,
you can use your Superbowl,
you know, when did your team win the Superbowl.
But those generally don't cause problems.
So we took some of the life defining
events of the 20th century.
The 1918 flu pandemic for example,
1929 crash of the stock market.
We looked at 1914, the seed date
for global war in this world.
And the interesting thing is
when we look at the mall within this 5,125 year context,
the repeat cycles,
the fractal cycles for all of those,
it's not about 2012,
it's about what happens between, this is now 2010,
between 2010 and 2012,
many of the most frightening cycles are going to repeat.
The conditions will be present between 2010 and 2011.
For every one of those things
you talked about, for economic crash cycles,
for potential global war cycles and--
Absolutely.
They are between 2010 now where we are,
this is January 2010
and the mid 2011, next 12,18 months
is the defining window of time
that will determine how 2012 turns out.
And none of the prophecies, none of the predictions
could state specifically what happens
because we are the unknown.
We are the factor that could not be factored
into the prediction and prophecies.
Jeane Dixon, Edgar Cayce, Nostradamus,
the Hopi prophecy
is where they're showing two parallel paths,
they're all about choice.
What do we choose?
So know that we understand that there is a choice
and we're also beginning to understand
that the language of that choice
is based in heart centered lifestyles,
heart centered ways of living,
And we'll talk about that in just a minute
but the key is, when we look at so many frightening cycles
converging into such a narrow window of time,
it looks scary until we recognize the good news.
The good news is that the end of every cycle,
when it stops, there's a little window of opportunity
that physicists call a choice point
before the cycle begins again.
So just to be clear,
a cycle begins with a seed and event
that sets in the motion a pattern of energy
for war, for economic collapse
that will repeat on a rhythmic basis.
Then there's an opportunity at the end of the cycle,
it ends before the next cycle begins,
there's this little window of opportunity
called the choice point
or we can reset that pattern.
If we do nothing then the pattern begins
and perpetuates itself.
And we can make choices anytime.
But the physics suggest that it's in this choice point,
this window of opportunity,
when our choices have the greatest potency,
and if we're going to make a choice,
why not do it when the choice can have the greatest effect?
So individually and collectively, 2010, 2011
we are living a collective window of opportunity,
a global choice point to redefine one of the most
frightening patterns of our past and change forever
the patterns of war, the patterns of disease,
the patterns of economic disparity that lead
to 1929 collapse.
And because so many of those systems
are breaking down right now,
the choice is do we prop up a system
that's not sustainable to begin with
or do we let that system go
and put something into place now,
use this opportunity to build something new
that prevents us from ever living those disasters again.
But what was so powerful
and I assure this with our audience last night,
we're here in Sedona, Arizona in the Sedona Audience.
And the ancients talked to us about that,
there has to be a generation
that lives through both ways of being.
There's got to be a generation that has lived and mastered
all that has been
and recognizes the point where that begins
to fall away and is putting something new in place
but neither one of them are in completion
and it takes such a really strong being.
Strong in terms of internal strength,
emotional strength, spiritual strength
the strength of resiliency
and the ability to work with families and communities
in the presence of these great changes
to know that the world has gone to hell in a handbasket
as my mom says.
Right.
That's her perspective.
I mean and that is a perspective, a lot people say that.
But what is change
or the things that are no longer sustainable?
It appears that when we go through these,
and this is the beauty of the cycles,
all these systems are in place
so we're now living the result of 5,000 years
of learning how to do military campaigns,
how to have global economic system,
how the heal and care for ourselves 5,000 years
of experience who got behind this.
Now, those systems are being stressed.
And what we find is under stress,
the ones that are sustainable
seemed to work pretty well
and they hold up.
The ones that don't are falling apart pretty quickly.
Our choice is to recognize that,
do we try to prop up the things
that are not sustainable in the long run
to make it easier for us
or do we just let them go now?
Because there are already new systems in place.
It's just a matter, there are green ways of living.
There are green sustainable ways of equitably
sustaining workers in large populations.
And it's a whole conversation we can have about that.
We've been doing a lot of interviews around
alternative types of banking
and exchange of time and so forth
in preparation for the understanding
we can create something different.
It's happening, it's starting.
Yeah, it's happening now.
So it's not like we got to stop now
and say, "Okay, what do we do?"
Because the choices were out there,
it's more about what do we choose, which of these systems?
Because there are people like you
and like your listeners who have been ahead of the curve.
They've already been thinking
for maybe 10, 15, 20 years
developing alternative ways of living,
alternative ways of doing business
and in finance, and of healing and negotiations
rather than war to solve our differences.
So of all those systems,
which ones do we choose to bring into place right now
and this is the window of opportunity, we're always--
And it's hard for people watching
all these things happening at one time.
It's very easy to become emotionally overwhelmed,
mentally overwhelmed, and say,
"It just feels like it's already in motion,
"what can we do to stop such a huge thing?"
But that is not,
that doesn't serve anything, anybody least of all the self
because the reality is the self,
and now I'd like to get into the magnetism story again
but of the heart
and what was shown in the graphs you represent,
you showed last night regarding 9/11
and the power of the human heart
if we want to take this on individually and collectively.
Yeah, well the,
you know, the bottom line.
I mean, mom and I have this conversation all the time.
To mom, the world feels like it changed quickly
and suddenly.
And so what mom says to me is,
she's always saying she wants to do together
when things settle down.
She goes, when things settle down,
when things get back to normal,
and I said, "What's normal?"
She says, "You know, like always 10 years ago."
And I said, "Mom, this is the new normal."
One of the most horrible experiences
that the United States had in 9/11 also
was the window of insight for scientist
to reveal one of the most profound truths
of our relationship to one another in the earth.
And quickly the bottom line is that
as a result of the 9/11, September 11, 2001,
everything that happened on that date,
we have two satellites in the Northern Hemisphere
that are called GOES, GOES geosynchronous satellites.
Every 30 minutes, they're sending back
a reading of the strength
for the magnetic fields of the earth.
The magnetic fields that sustain and connect all life,
the very magnetic fields that protect us
from influences, from beyond our world,
solar influences,
those fields we are intimately connected to.
Our brain, our bodies, everything.
Everything, heart, brain, body or science
has only recently begun to grasp
the depth of that connection and the implications.
So it was on that date
scientist were looking at these,
the satellite data.
And every day, every 24 hours there's an ebb and a flow,
the magnetic field ebb and flow within a certain range
and they're used to seeing that
and all of the sudden, they're watching a spike
for both their satellites and they're saying,
"What could that be from?"
And they overlaid it on to a map of dates
and it was at 9 AM, eastern standard time,
September 11, 2001.
9 AM, 15 minutes after the first plane hit the first tower.
It took about 15 minutes for the images to make it
around the world, to circulate through the media.
And what the scientists discovered was the
genuine untrained emotional response,
heart based response
of the global population
was so powerful when we have it collectively
that it actually influenced the very fields of the earth
that connect us and sustain all life.
Now some of that response was fear,
some of it was sadness,
some of it was shock,
some of it was compassion, some of it was anger.
So that's why we say it was untrained
but it was collectively occurring in the same moment
and time, these scientist said,
"Well, you know, humans have the ability
"to actually influence the very field
"that connects all life."
It gives a while new meaning to the Gaia
concept of us on a living body.
This led to a series of experiments to determine
what about human emotion was affecting those fields?
And what they found is that the human heart
creates the strongest electrical field
and the strongest magnetic field of any organ in the body
much more than previously thought.
So the human heart can be up to
a hundred times stronger
than the electrical field of the brain
but the human heart is about 5,000 times stronger
magnetically than the human brain
when we create a certain condition within us
that is induced by following the principles
of our most cherished spiritual and ancient traditions.
It isn't about religion,
it's about a heart centered experience
that can best be described in the western words
as care, appreciation, gratitude
and when we do that, what we do is we set up
a condition between our heart and our brain
that's called coherence.
The signal between the heart and the brain.
Communication when the feeling is optimum,
that signal can be measured about 0.10 cycles per second.
So you put one zero hertz
in that quality of the signal is what
attunes us to this field that connects everything
by following some of our most ancient
and cherished spiritual traditions
without the religious, the rules and the dogma,
this is about our connectedness
to the earth and to one another.
All the other stuff came along later.
By honoring that connection,
we literally have the ability to influence this field.
Well, here's why that's important.
In the process of coherence, we think better,
we solve problems better as individuals,
we're more cooperative, we're less aggressive.
We have greater cognitive abilities as the term that's used.
Our immune systems are strengthened.
And when a number of humans get together
and create that coherence,
it extends beyond their immediate bodies, into the filed
and others benefit from it
even though they are not actively participating in it.
This suggest,
and again, goes back to those traditions
that in times of great need,
and when the planet is going through
rapid change in times of peril
to the degree that we can collectively come together
and create this coherence in our lives
that we can share that coherence
with those who simply don't have the time
and the opportunity to do something like that.
People in the Haiti, I think probably the last thing
they're doing right now
is sitting down collectively creating coherence
because they're trying to get through the end of the day
but our coherence is certainly benefiting them
and the workers that are trying to help them right now
and that's just one example.
But if the leaders of our nations are on defense
as to whether or not to solve a problem
through war negotiation,
the data suggests and it's not definitive
that this is where it looks like this data is going
from some of the studies
that creating a field of collective coherence
puts this fields into motion that tends
to tip the scales toward cooperation
and balance and peace
rather than aggression and competition and war.
And I cannot think of a better
awareness for us to come into
at the time of this great change
than to know that we are literally so deeply connected
with one another in the fields of the earth.
That when we work together, again,
this is the key, we have to work together to do this.
That the need for us to transcend the challenges
will drive our choice to cooperate at least initially
through heart-based experience.
My sense is that we will do that
because we needed to get through the changes
in this 2012 window.
For now on the short term
and after the 2012 window is passed,
I think we're gonna find that we like working together,
for better people, we have a better world,
where everybody is still,
weve got individual nations.
Everybody's got their culture and their dance
and their music but we learn to work together
for big things that benefit all of us.
And if that in fact is triggered
by the need to do so now because the changes are driving it.
Then when 2012 is no longer here,
I think we'll continue doing that
and the ancients and the prophecies have always said,
at the end of this window,
well, you will have a great war
and we lose all that we cherished
or we'll open the door to a thousand years of peace
and a new Golden Age which is what was here
preceding the last cycle, the great Golden Age
that so many have talked about.
And I think that's where we're going.
I think we've chosen or secure this route to get there.
And I can't say I understand
why we seem to need to experience what we don't want
before we know we don't want it
and then move a new direction rather
than setting our sights on a goal and saying,
"This is what we choose, let's live this way."
I don't know why it doesn't work that way.
It seems that the human being at this stage
in our development seems to learn quickest through pain.
Well, we do that in our personal relationships.
We do it in everything.
Through our marriages, our divorces, our careers,
we've done it as a world.
We have to experience global holocaust
before we said, " We know we don't want that."
"Global war, we don't want that."
"Global disease, we don't want that."
So, this is the opportunity,
so I'm encouraged.
My sense is we're not out of the woods yet
but we are close to the edge of the woods
because now we recognize
that the changes are part of a natural rhythmic cycle.
We know how to look.
We know that the changes are not anomalous.
We're living what we always live when we go through
this time, in the cycle.
It just hasn't happened for 5,000 years
with almost seven billion people on the planet.
To the best of our knowledge,
we know that we have the ability to work together
collectively through heart centered ways of living.
We have a whole conversation about that.
To tip the scales of change and choice in our favor
as the systems that sustain us,
or not sustaining us, as they break down and fall away,
we know that we can work together and do those things.
For me, that is the message of our ancestors
and they said, "If you can know yourself in this time,
"then you'll be just fine in 2012 and beyond."
So 2012, from my perspective is not the end of the world,
it's the end of a world age.
And by definition, the end of anything
is beginning of what comes next.
And I am honored to be here with all of you
to bring in a new world age, a sixth world age.
The last humans to see what we're seeing right now
walked this earth 1,700 years before the biblical Exodus
from Egypt just for perspective.
So I don't know if we'll be around to see the next
one or not but we're here right now.
Well, there's argument
that we may have been their last time,
and maybe there's next time too.
And, Gregg, I know that you're in support
of the global coherence project and initiative
and I'll go ahead and talk about that in a little bit
'cause I know we're about out of time,
I've got to get you back to your hotel.
But I will go ahead and let people know about it
because I think a lot of times,
someone's listening, thinking,
yeah, we can all work together,
I don't personally know a single person
that goes along with this type of thinking
in my everyday life, that doesn't matter.
That doesnt have to stop us from being part of something.
Can I say something about them?
Please.
For transparency, I am on the steering committee
and the advisory board for the first of its kind,
science based initiative
making use of the discoveries that we just shared
of the fact that heart based experience
triggers positive changes in this global magnetic filed,
it's called,
we know that coherence is good for us individually,
so global coherence would be a good thing.
It's called the global coherence initiative, GCI.
What sets it apart from any other project of its kind
is it's privately funded,
this isn't a government initiative.
And privately, the technology is being
developed and deployed all over the earth
to measure the fields that we're talking about
so it's not a byproduct from a weather satellite
or from a communication satellite,
these devices are built only to measure these fields
and the military and the government are interested in this
because this has never been done before.
We're learning a lot of things that we never knew
about how complex our heart based relationship
to one another and the earth really is through this project.
This is fabulous.
So the first layer is that the sensors
are being built and deployed,
some of them are out them right now.
So we can tell everyday what the magnetic fields
of the earth are doing and how they're responding.
Phase one, phase two
coherence is something that can be taught and learned
relatively quickly and easily
and people are interested in doing that
through the Institute of HeartMath
and their website.
Now, I think you're doing some interviews
with people who are involved with that.
So I encourage our listeners, if you
rather than simply saying, this is what's happening.
For me it's important to share something actionable,
what can we do?
How can we work together as a family
to create a heart based initiative?
It tips the scales of change and balance in our favor,
in this window of opportunity, in GCI
to the best of my knowledge is the only
science based initiative.
The first of its kind ever been done to do that,
and I'm passionate about it.
I think it's a worthwhile to look into
and I want to thank you for the opportunity
to talk about this.
Yes, and also I'd like to follow up with you,
maybe in a year or so once it has a chance to
bring in some more data.
In this room in a year.
And this year,
yes, in this room and when youre--
I'd like to that and see
'cause I know we could have talk another hour
just about that.
But meanwhile, you've given people a place to go,
HeartMath, fabulous program people can really see
their own resonant, their own coherence
coming into order.
And I thank you so much for taking the time.
You're a much in demand man these days.
Well, thank you for being such a gracious host
and for your patience with our schedules
and I look forward to that interview a year from now, okay?
Thank you for the work you do.
Thank you.
For a much more expanded look
into the fractal time we spoke off
and all of the other subjects brought up in this interview,
you can visit's Gregg's website at www.greggbraden.com
and that's Gregg with two G's.
You can also pick up a copy of one of his many books
through all major book sellers.
Until next time.
Thanks for watching CMN.
(gentle music)